So let's start our first Java programme in this course.
And it's always been a tradition
when you're learning a new programming language
to create a simple programme that outputs
the text, hello world.
Now we're going to do that in today's video.
So for the best results for this course
follow along and type where I'm typing
and perform the operations that I'm performing.
Don't just watch because you'll find you'll
get a lot more out of it
and things will just make a lot more sense.
All right, so we've got IntelliJ IDEA loaded
as you can see here.
I'm gonna come up here and click on Create New Project.
And this screen, this is the Community Edition,
the free edition that I'm running.
If you're running Ultimate Edition
you will find there's some extra options down
the left-hand side.
However, both have the Java option here
so make sure that's checked.
And then you'll come over here and also make sure
that Project SDK has got the current version 11,
JDK Version 11.
Now as of the time I'm recording this video
it's 11.0.3, so if you haven't got anything there
or you've got a different version
go back to the instal win-stallation of
the Java Development Kit videos and grab JDK 11,
And there's also a video in there which explains
the reasoning for using JDK 11 in case you're wondering
because, of course, there is
a newer version already available.
Right, so once that's selected, click on Next.
Now there's an option there to create a template.
We're going to not use that for now
but we'll be using that later in the course.
So I'm gonna click on Next.
Now here is where we define the location
and the project name.
So I'm gonna start by calling this one Hello World.
Now note that I can out spaces in there
but it's not a good idea in general
to use spaces either as a name, as a file name,
a project name in this case because that will
ultimately be part of the folder or the project location.
So I'm gonna suggest your always just capitalise
the words if you want to separate
them instead of using space.
The other thing we need to do is specify a project location.
And what I suggest you do, just for ease of organisation
to put all the projects in a specific directory
noting that every time we create a new project
in IntelliJ it's gonna create a subfolder.
So what I'm gonna do is navigate, in my case
I've create network drive.
I'm gonna navigate to that by clicking on
the ellipses here, the three dots,
and I'm gonna go to that folder,
and what I'm going to do, is put all my code in there.
So I'm gonna go in this folder.
I've got one here called Java Masterclass Remaster.
So I'm gonna select Current.
That's really where I want all my files to be.
Now the first time you do this.
If you come down and have a look down the end of
the folder location here.
It's going to put that in the root folder.
So what you may need to do the first time you specify
a new project location is go back in there a second time.
Once you're in that folder, we wanna create a new
folder in that subfolder.
And come over here in this case to New Folder.
And it might look slightly different
on a Mac or a Lynx platform,
but there's a New Folder option
and I'm gonna call it HelloWorld, again without spaces.
Click on OK.
Click on OK again.
So what you should see now on your screen is
the project name and the end of
the project location showing the same thing.
So in subsequent projects as I mentioned,
you should find that it will automatically do that for you.
So we've now got a subfolder being created,
our current Java Masterclass Remaster,
that's the folder that I've decided to use
everytime you create a new project
it's going to create a subfolder with our project.
And that's just, is really a nice way to organise things.
All right, so I'm gonna click on Finish at this point.
All right, you can see that there's a bit
of setting-up from IntelliJ and eventually we got
this little project pane on the left-hand side opened.
Now this project location, we're gonna be talking more
about that later but essentially this is like
an area that has automatically been set-up by IntelliJ
for our programme code and it's organising
things in a certain way.
So we can come over here and click on
this little greater than sign there
which will open up the folder.
So we've got this .idea which is IntelliJ IDEA's
sort of working files, and this IML file.
We don't need to worry about any of these now.
What we wanna do is now create
our first Java programming class.
So to do that, we're gonna right-click this SLC Folder,
that's actually a folder.
Click on New and select Java Class.
And we're gonna call this one, Hello.
Click on OK.
And you can see that when I've done that I've automatically
got some code showing on the right-hand window
and to the left in the Project Pane
we've got Hello with a little c in blue
and that just denotes that it's a class.
Now Java programmes and most other
programming languages have keywords.
Now each keyword has a specific meaning
and sometimes they need to be used in a specific order.
You write Java programmes by following a specific
set of rules, a syntax, using a combination
of these keywords and other things you'll see
which collectively form a Java programme.
And just a thing to note, keywords are case sensitive.
So the word public, for example, and public with a capital p
and even public all in uppercase, well they're considered
as different things to Java and in fact many other
programming languages.
Right, so looking at the code we can see on the screen there
public and class are two Java keywords.
And note that IntelliJ highlights those or bolds them.
They have both got a specific meaning
which we'll find more about moving forward.
So the public Java keyword is what's called
an access modifier.
So an access modifier allows us to define the scope
or how other parts of your code
or even someone else's code can access our code.
But we'll be going into details for that later.
For now, we're gonna be using the public access modifier
anytime we create a new project to give full access.
And again, we'll come back to access modifiers
at the appropriate stage in the course
once we've filled in some of
the blanks with your Java knowledge.
All right so, next we're gonna look at class
the keyword class.
So what we've done here is we've defined the class.
Now the class keyword is used to define a class
and the class name will be the text following the keyword,
so hello in this case.
Also notice the left and right curly braces used
to define the class block.
So to define a class it requires an optional
access modifier at the start, and in this case
we've used public followed by the keyword class
followed by the left and right curly braces.
And the left and right curly braces
are defining the class body.
Now anything in between that body,
between the left curly brace and the right curly brace,
is considered part of this class.
We can have data and code,
as you'll see as we progress through the course.
All right so, that's our first project
and our first class defined.
Let's finish the video here.
And in the next one,
we're going to add our first ever method
as well as finding out what a method is
and then move forward to printing out
that hello world message.
So I'll see you in the next video.